Once around, Dishnomia.
So, Dishnomia, daughter of Eris. Aris,
of course, is a dwarf planet, slightly
more massive than Pluto, orbiting beyond
Neptune. And the discovery of it by
Professor Mike Brown was uh the cause of
a discussion about what we meant by
planet, but that's another story. You
can also call these things trans
neptunian objects TNOs. So sometimes I
may use that term. Now Eris is actually
beyond the Kiper belt, the main region
in which we find Pluto and is a member
of the scattered disc and it's in quite
an elliptical orbit uh out there beyond
Neptune. But we're really here not
talking about Aris, we're talking about
its moon Dnomia. So Eris was discovered
in January of 2005 and dishnomia was
found just in September of the same year
by Mike Brown and his team at the
Palomar Observatory.
The top image there with the moving dot
that's Eris moving across the sky. And
then we have a super highresolution
image of Eris showing dysomia orbiting
around it or at least in a position
close to it with the orbit drawn in
afterwards.
Now of course the names Aris and Dismia
came along later. Originally, Aerys was
nicknamed Zena from the character in the
TV series Zena Warrior Princess, and
she's the one in the middle. And the
moon Gabrielle,
and that was named for the girl on the
right there, who is the sidekick of Zena
in the series.
The official names were then chosen with
Eris being the goddess of strife and
discord and Disnomia, Eris's daughter in
mythology, the Greek goddess of
lawlessness.
Now, this was interesting because it
followed a precedent. Um, the D for
dishomia is the same D that starts
Diane, the name of Mike Brown's wife.
And that was in common with the C for
Sharon, moon of Pluto. And the C was the
first letter of Charlene, the discoverer
of that object.
And as a further coincidence which Mike
Brown swears was accidental, and that is
that uh Dysnomia, the goddess of
lawlessness and Gabrielle, the character
that was the original name that had been
uh suggested. Well, Gabrielle was played
by Lucy Lawless in the film. So, it
seems that maybe there's a connection
there, but Mike Brown says it was just
an accident.
These things do happen. Here's a James
Web Space Telescope picture of Eris and
Dysnomia just off down to the lower left
there. And a series of pictures showing
at different times that Dysomia is going
around its orbit. Uh the orbit has been
measured and there've been a number of
measurements and the consensus has
settled on 37,460
kilometers on average um with a period
of 15.772
days. That's been up and down by maybe a
tenth of a day in various estimates, but
we seem to have come to this as the
consensus now. And curiously, it's
tipped over at 78° to the ecliptic. So,
it's almost orbiting um around at right
angles to the passage of
Aerys around the sun.
And it's possible, but we don't know
that that's because it's orbiting around
the equator of Aris and that Aris itself
is tipped right over um in the same way
that Uranus is tipped over in its orbit
at almost a right angle. So, it'd be
really interesting to be able to
determine if Aris is in fact tipped over
at the same angle or not. Now in terms
of its orbit compared to other similar
objects that we have here Pluto and
Sharon at the top there 19,000 km and at
the bottom Orcus with its moon Van at
9,000 whereas Dysomia is further than
either of them uh 37,000
um and uh that's uh quite a
significantly larger orbit but using
that orbit knowing the diameter of the
orbit and a period. We can plug the
numbers into Kepler's laws of planetary
motion and in particular the third law
expressed at the top there. Time squared
for the period is equal to 4<unk>^2 over
gm
and times the cube of the radius. So we
have this t ^2 proportional to r cubed
with the other magic numbers there being
constants.
And if we plug it in with uh we notice
that by comparison to the earth
erys and dishomia's period of 15.8 days
is about 60% of the earth moon system
and that the
orbital diameter is about 110th. So
let's plug in 6 and square it and 0.1
and cube that and we get the ratio of
the masses because the 4 pi squar and g
all cancels out and we get 360.
So that tells us that
earth is 360 times as massive as erys
and we can get the value out by plugging
in the 6 * 10 ^ 24 kg of earth and we
get 1.67 67 * 10 22 kg for Eris and
that's 27% more massive than Pluto. Now
in fact it's Aris is actually slightly
less in diameter. So, it's definitely
denser, but it is the more more massive
object. And I had a a chance to attend a
lecture by Mike Brown recently where he
pointed out that that extra little 27%
of mass means that if you added all the
asteroids in the inner solar system
asteroid belt to Pluto, it still
wouldn't be as massive as AIS. So, it's
really quite a big difference.
Anyway, we're looking at Dysnomia, 615
kilometers in diameter. That's a quarter
of the diameter of Eris, making it one
of the largest primary to secondary
ratios in the solar system. Um, it's the
second largest dwarf planet moon after
the Pluto Sharon combination. So,
definitely quite a significant size of
moon here. And
using Kepler's laws and other factors,
we can make an estimate of dysomia's
mass. It's much easier to get the mass
of the heavy object that's really
sitting still in the center of the orbit
um using the formula that I just
described. But we can estimate the mass
of dysmia as well. and we get a figure
of somewhere around 10 19 to 10 the 20
kg which is only between 1 and 3% of the
mass of EIS something like that and as a
result of that and the significant
distance between them and the 15-day
orbit um we look at the system and we
can't see erys wobbling around a barry
center when you look closely at Pluto
and Shar Aaron, you can determine that
the two of them are orbiting a common
center of mass, but we can't see erys
doing any gyrations at the moment. So,
that's quite interesting. And it's quite
likely from these figures and the size
that we know about that it's a fairly
low density object. Uh likely to be ice
and low density volatile materials
frozen up. um creating that density of
uh less than one gram per cubic cm.
Now with those figures and the diameter
we can try to estimate whether or not it
should have enough gravity to pull
itself into a spheroid. This is one of
the CA uh classification points about
whether something is a dwarf planet or
not is whether or not it's managed to
reach hydrostatic equilibrium and pull
itself into a spheroid.
And we don't know for dysmia. Ice at
this low temperature is quite strong and
it takes a lot more gravity than you
might expect to cause it to flow. Um,
and with a small object like this, the
figures work out that this is right on
the cusp of the force of gravity
overwhelming the strength of ice and
crushing it into a near spherical shape.
So, it'd be very interesting to be able
to work out what the shape really is. Is
this a rubble pile or is it in fact more
like a dwarf planet? And that's
certainly the case for Pluto and Sharon.
That's really a double dwarf planet. So
maybe this is another one. We don't
know. What we can tell is the color. And
I've been showing it in black and white
so far as the artist's impression, but
here I've colorized it to more or less
realistic colors.
It's very dark and very red. This is
common to a lot of outer solar system
objects. It suggests that the surface
has been exposed to solar radiation for
a very long time and hasn't been
refreshed. And we have the buildup of
those radiation products the tholins the
complex carbon nitrogen oxygen compounds
uh hydrogen included that uh tend to
make a sort of chemical soup with this
red color over the surface of these
inactive geologically speaking objects
and very dark only 5% of the light is
reflected from it. Now we can look at
the visible light. We can look at the
infrared. We can also look at the sub
millimeter wave reflections from it
using our various different telescopes.
And from that we can ascertain the
temperature. And we use the good old
Stefan Boltzman law that I like to talk
about to be able to tell us the surface
area based on the known temperature.
and we can see the brightness at
different wavelengths, work out what's
going on and figure out the size and
that matches up with this very low
reflectivity. So we can that's how we
calculate all of that. Now
also common with a lot of large moons
orbiting around their planets dysomia is
in tidal lock. It keeps one face towards
Eric Eis all the time. So its rotation
period matches the orbital period and
one side of AIS points to uh is will be
sorry one side of dysomia points towards
AIS all the time. We see that with the
Earth's moon as well. We only ever get
to see one side of it from the ground
here. Um, and that happens because tidal
stress within the moon tends to slow the
rotation period until the orbital period
and it match. Once that happens, there's
no more tidal stress and so the process
locks in place. And we can actually
estimate the time that that will take.
There's a complicated formula which I
haven't bothered to show here that
relates the mass, the size, the
composition and structure comes into it
but tells us the length of time needed
for such a uh an equilibrium to be
achieved. And for a moon orbiting a
larger body, that's usually pretty quick
of the order of uh tens uh of millions
of years, maybe a hundred million years
in some cases. So clearly it's older
than that and uh there's no problem here
at all. But
when we look at it, we also find that we
think that the period of rotation of
erys on its own axis is also 15.772
days matching the orbit of dysomia. So
Aris is also keeping one face towards
its moon. So this is double tidal lock.
Now we see that in Pluto and Sharon and
that's what the animation on the right
is but the principle is the same. They
both stare at each other in complete
lock step rotating and revolving all in
that one common period. Now this is a
bit weird because it seems to have
happened too fast for the formula that I
was describing. Disenomia is too light
to have easily been able to cause erys
to end up
spinning down to the right speed and
matching that rotation period.
What that suggests to us is that EIS is
more internally fluid and able to
dissipate energy more quickly than you
might expect. Um clearly if there is
more opportunity for tidal flow then
there's more opportunity for energy to
be dissipated as warmth and that can sap
the rotational energy of the primary
cause it to slow down until the tidal
lock is achieved when the process
switches off. So, that's clearly
happened and it suggests that maybe
there's a lot more water or some form of
fluid going on under the surface of Eris
than we might expect. And we've got
other reasons to suspect that as well.
Now, the question is where did Disenomia
come from? And I've got this graphic
here of Pluto and Sharon at the top,
Orcus and Van in the middle, and Aerys
and Dismia at the bottom there, showing
their relative sizes.
It's likely that dysomia formed in orbit
round Eris coalesed from the de debris
from a giant impact and that that is
probably the way that
we saw the moon be created around the
earth and that van was created around
Orcus and also probably Sharon around
Pluto. So that seems like this is a
fairly common effect. And eight out of
10 of the largest of these Kiper belt
objects seem to have these large near
planet-sized moons, suggesting that
collisions out here in the Kiper belt
were very common indeed. And maybe this
is also explaining that extreme 78
degree orbital tilt.
Now also in addition to the uh the tidal
lock effect, I just wanted to sort of
give you this graphic just to finish
that off. Actually the tidal locking
effect should have fully circularized
the orbit of dysnomia as well. If you
have a moon formed in orbit around a
primary, inevitably the gravity field
towards the primary tends to make the
shape of the moon and the mass
distribution within it a bit lopsided
with the heavy side ending up pointing
towards the primary. It it's the stable
state.
But once that has happened, you also
then get tidal drag effects in that if
you're in an elliptical orbit, then the
axis will librate because the speed of
the moon around the primary is much
quicker
as it's at its near point in the orbit
and much slower when it's further away.
But it can't change its rotation on its
own axis like that. And so it tends to
get ahead and behind of having that
heavy side pointing downhill in the
gravity field. And that creates a torque
on the object which has the effect of
circularizing the orbit. So we should
see the orbit of dysomia being a perfect
circle and it's quite close to that.
Now one thing that that orbit is also
going to do is something that happened
with Pluto and Sharon back in the 1980s.
Sharon's orbit being at a highly tilted
angle to the orbital path of Pluto
caused it to cross our line of sight and
give us these repeated transit eclipse
events where we could either see both
objects or whichever one was the nearer
while one was hiding at the back. And
that allowed us to generate using
computers the map of the surface of
Pluto over a 360 degree rotation that
you see in the animation to the right.
And in 200 years time, too long for me,
I'm afraid, but Denomia will begin doing
a series of transit eclipse passes over
the surface of Eris. So maybe we can use
that to generate a similar map of the
surface of AIS without having to visit
it.
But that orbit circular or not is a
giving us a slight hint.
It appears to be slightly eccentric.
The deviation of about one dishomia
diameter away from the overall orbit.
So, plus or minus 600 km out of 37,000
is not a huge deviation, but it really
ought to be more circular than that. It
could be a trick of the light. It could
be that dysomia, like Ipotus at Saturn,
is brighter on one side than the other,
and so it's fooling us as to where the
center of dysomia truly lives. Or it
could be the fact that Eris's shape is
very oblate and causing this slight
irregularity. But it could be that this
is a hint that there is an interior
smaller moonlet yet to be discovered.
And I just love astronomy because
there's always more to find out. So I'm
waiting for the chance to uh get some
more data on EIS and find out more about
dysnomia. So, thanks very much for
listening. And that's the first time
I've actually specifically picked on an
individual moon. Maybe I'll do more like
that perhaps uh in the future. So, watch
this space. Thanks a lot.